---
layout: post
title:  "Man Pages (Part 1)"
date:   2024-12-08 00:39:08 -0800
categories: Utilities
---

# Contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Text Processing Origins](#text-processing-origins)
- [Manual Page Format](#manual-page-format)
- [Manual Sections](#manual-sections)
  - [Sub-Sections](#sub-sections)
  - [System V Sections Reordering](#system-v-sections-reordering)
  - [Higher-Number Sections](#higher-number-sections)

# Introduction

When Unix was created in the 1970s, it was well-described in technical
papers and reports -- not surprising, considering the industry
influence Bell Labs held as a research institution. Most notably, the
earliest presentation of Unix external to the Bell System was the
paper _The UNIX Time-Sharing System_, which was delivered at the
_Fourth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles_ (_1973_). Over
50 years later, what is presented in that paper is still recognizable
to anybody familiar with Unix's modern descendant, Linux.

What might be somewhat more surprising though considering its research
origins is that Unix almost since the very beginning had a
comprehensive set of online reference documentation for all its
commands, system calls, file formats, etc. These are the the manual-
or man-pages. On Unix systems used interactively, the man-pages have
historically always been installed, space permitting.

Each new edition of this manual effectively became a snapshot of the
state of Unix. That is why these early versions of Unix are usually
referred to as "editions" because that is what the (printed) manuals
were called:

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
**UNIX PROGRAMMER'S MANUAL**
{: refdef}

_Sixth Edition_
{: refdef}

_K. Thompson_\\
_D. M. Ritchie_
{: refdef}

_May, 1975_
{: refdef}

Especially in the early days of Unix, it was not uncommon to use
either the "edition" name or a version: Sixth Edition may have been
called v6 as well by its users and developers.

The way the manual pages have evolved and how they are used has
changed over the decades. This set of posts is intended to give people
unfamiliar with them an overview, as well as offer a review to
seasoned users.

# Text Processing Origins

After Bell Labs' departure from MIT's Multics project in 1969, the
scientists at the Computing Science Research Center were lacking some
direction. There was great interest in the group to acquire their own
computer for research, but most large systems like a PDP-10 they
desired were too expensive. After Ken Thompson wrote some experimental
code on another department's unused PDP-7, which showed some promising
ideas for an operating system, fellow team member Joe Ossanna proposed
that a text processing system would be developed if the team could
purchase the then new PDP-11/20 minicomputer (_1970_).

The ingredients for a text processing system were an editor and a text
formatting system. Both of those came to the nascent Unix system via
MIT's earlier CTSS time-sharing project, which predated Multics. The
QED editor, originally written at Berkeley for the SDS 940 system, was
implemented on CTSS by Ken Thompson himself. A text formatting system
called _runoff_ also ran on CTSS. Both were ported to other systems at
Bell Labs first and eventually as `ed` and `roff` to the much smaller
PDP-11 under Unix. Unix system development moved quickly and by
mid-1971, three typists regularly used the PDP-11/20 to write and
format patent applications for AT&T.

Doug McIlroy, the department head who later contributed the seminal
concept of "pipelines" to Unix, insisted on high quality documentation
of the system. This resulted in a virtuous cycle: as new functionality
was documented, changes to the implementation were made to make it
easier to talk about it and in the process improve both the system and
the documentation. Unix tools were used to document Unix, improving
the documentation tools themselves as well. This work predated the
widespread use of display terminals -- the typical terminal was a
Teletype Model 33 or 37, so to "display" a manual page was to actually
get a print-out of one.

By Unix Second Edition (_1972_), `roff` had been rewritten as `nroff`
(for _new_ `roff`) to make it more flexible. Macros were supported in
`nroff` and a macro package for manual pages eventually became
available as the `man` package by Sixth Edition (_1975_). In Fourth
Edition (_1973_) `troff` was created to support the Graphic Systems
C/A/T phototypesetter, which provided high quality typesetting with
different fonts. The program also replaced the previous version of
`nroff` and continued supporting output to fixed-width devices like
terminals, teletypes, or other printers.

Despite its importance to the Unix system, `troff` has never been
standardized as part of the POSIX standard. A recent (_2024_) request
to do so was rejected by the POSIX maintenance group, because no known
group "would be willing to spend the time."

The `troff` program and related utilities were the core typesetting
tools in proprietary Unix distributions. A version of `troff` called
GNU `troff` (commonly `groff`) was developed on SunOS in 1989 for the
GNU Project and remains the primary way to format manual pages on
Linux. Just like `troff`, `groff` is a general purpose typesetting
tool that can create output in a number of formats like HTML, PDF, or
the device-independent DVI format.

In response to some of the HTML output limitations and slow
performance of `groff`, an effort to redesign man-page processing
began in 2008 for BSD-based Unix variants. While originally just an
HTML output formatter, the `mandoc` language and a specialized
replacement to `groff` by the same name were implemented. This tool is
available on numerous BSD, Linux, and Unix systems and has been the
default man-page formatter on macOS since Sequoia 14.1 (_2023_).

# Manual Page Format

The basic structure of the manual pages was outlined in First Edition
(_1971_):

  * **Name**
  * **Synopsis**
  * **Description**
  * **Files**
  * **See Also**
  * **Diagnostics**
  * **Bugs**
  * **Owner**

Dennis Ritchie wrote the earliest page, almost certainly for the `cat`
command. The specific format wasn't intentionally designed and earlier
time-sharing systems included similar information in their reference
documentation. The inclusion of _Bugs_ and _Owner_ are particularly
interesting and speak to a degree of accountability for the system in
the early days, when it was used by very few people.

As the user base for Unix increased, the _Owner_ section appeared less
frequently. It was renamed _Author_ by Fourth Edition and only used in
section six (_User-maintained programs_) until completely disappearing
by Seventh Edition (_1979_). The Berkeley distributions of Unix (BSD)
kept using an _Authors_ section as do the GNU tools commonly used in
Linux distributions. This is indicative not only of the communal
spirit of development in those Unix variants, but also the
proliferation of email since the 1980s, which makes it easier to
contact the authors despite vastly distributed development efforts.

The POSIX standard sets forth various section titles for its
standards, which are different between, e.g., utilities or header
files. The overall structure is still borrowed from the manual pages,
no doubt because POSIX originally used the Unix System V Interface
Definition and the BSD Reference Manuals as its starting point.

The specific sections in each Unix version or distribution can be
quite different, but almost always at least include _Name_,
_Synopsis_, _Description_ and _See Also_, if applicable. A section on
diagnostics, errors, return or exit codes is also usually included.

Many additional sections can be found in manual pages: security,
standards conformance, examples, environment, attributes, history, and
many more. While the initial intent for man-pages was to be terse and
informal, more extensive manuals have been created. Manual pages for
image processing applications or compilers can run into many hundreds
of pages if they were to be printed out.

Creating manual pages in the `nroff` languages is supported by the
macro package mentioned above. For example, each section is introduced
with the `.SH` macro to format it properly or `.B` is used to bold a
command or argument.

# Manual Sections

The manual has traditionally been divided into numbered sections with
alphabetical ordering. Each section is a collection of a type of
information (e.g., commands vs. system calls) and is intentionally not
grouped based on functionality. While the manual sections were
numbered with Roman numerals prior to Seventh Edition, the more common
Arabic numerals will be used here.

The numbering of the sections allows for information with the same
name to appear in different parts of the manual: the `man` command and
the `man` macro package are in sections 1 and 7, respectively. This is
why it is common to refer to specific information by its section
number like `man(1)` and `man(7)` (or some typographic variation
thereof.)

In the print versions of the manuals for the early version of Unix, an
introduction outlines the structure of the manual sections and an
introduction in Unix itself. This informally is "section 0" of the
man-pages. Since Second Edition (_1972_), a permuted index follows,
which is created by the `ptx` command and makes finding the right
manual page much easier than a simply alphabetic index. Additionally,
most sections usually include their own `intro` page, modeled after
the "section 0" intro, a practice which seems to have started with the
section 2 (_System Calls_) in Fourth Edition.

The typical section ordering used by AT&T's Research Unix up to and
including the commercial AT&T System III (_1980_) was also used by BSD
and commercial Unixes based on either of them. Linux adopted the same
structure and is still using it to date.

- **(1)** _Commands_
- **(2)** _System Calls_
- **(3)** _Subroutines_
- **(4)** _Special files_
- **(5)** _File Formats_
- **(6)** _User-maintained programs_ (_Games_ since 7th Edition and in BSD)
- **(7)** _Miscellaneous_
- **(8)** _Maintenance_ (since 3rd Edition)

Section 7 was a catch-all section and had many names over the years:

- _Miscellaneous_ (1st through 5th Editions)
- _User maintained subroutines_ (6th Edition)
- _Macro packages and language conventions_ (since 3BSD)
- _Conventions_ (7th Edition)
- _Miscellaneous Facilities_ (System III)
- _Data bases and language conventions_ (8th and 9th Edition)
- _Information sources_ (10th Edition)

Section 8 started out in Third Edition (_1973_) as a collection of
system administration tasks and commands. Interestingly, the `kill`
and `ps` commands were initially documented in section 8 before moving
to 1 as discussed in the [ps options
post](../../../2021/12/29/ps-options.html#the-origin-of-ps-option-styles).
In Seventh Edition, some of the system maintenance commands previously
in section 8 moved into a newly named sub-section 1M:

> The maintenance section 8 discusses procedures not intended for use
> by the ordinary user. These procedures often involve use of commands
> of section 1, where an attempt has been made to single out
> peculiarly maintenance-flavored commands by marking them 1M.

By System III, section 8 became _System Maintenance Procedures_. In
later commercial Unix variants like Solaris (see below), there was no
more section 8 but instead a _System Administration Guide_ similar to
the BSD SMM, the _System Manager's Manual_.

The later editions of Research Unix (8th, 9th, and 10th) were
primarily used internally at Bell Labs and continued to evolve the
manual section structure as seen with section 7 above. The Bell Labs
Unix-follow on Plan 9 (_1992_) continued the concept of manual pages
and reworked the structure of the manual sections to be in line with
how Plan 9 worked: section 4 describes the file services and section 5
the Plan 9 file protocol to access them, for example.

> #### Xenix Man-Page Oddity
> 
> Microsoft's (and later SCO's) Xenix was originally a 7th Edition
> Unix, which was ported to a number of architectures. By Xenix 3.0
> (_1983_), it was based on System III and curiously abandoned the
> numbered manual sections in favor of letters:
>
> - **(C)** _Commands_
> - **(CT)** _Text Processing Commands_
> - **(CP)** _Programming Commands_
> - **(S)** _System Services_
> - **(F)** _File Formats_
> - **(M)** _Miscellaneous_

#### Sub-Sections

Starting with Seventh Edition, sub-sections grouped functionality in
each manual section, counter to the original intent of how the
sections were supposed to be structured.

By System V, the following sub-sections were used in section 1:

- **(1C)** _Communications Commands_
- **(1G)** _Graphics Commands_
- **(1M)** _System Maintenance Commands_

System V Release 4 (_1989_) was a major release that became the basis
for several commercial Unix offerings. Because it merged AT&T Unix,
BSD, SunOS, and Xenix, often several versions of the same command were
installed that appeared in different manual sub-sections. In Solaris
for example, in addition to section 1:

- **(1B)** _SunOS/BSD Compatibility Package Commands_
- **(1S)** _SunOS Specific Commands_

and in Solaris 11.2 (_2014_):

- **(1G)** _Alternative open source implementations of Solaris
  commands_ (GNU)

The man-pages for libraries in System V had the following sub-sections
for section 3:

- **(3C)** _C Programming Language Library Routines_
- **(3S)** _Standard I/O Library Routines_
- **(3E)** _Executable and Linking Format Library Routines_
- **(3G)** _General Purpose Library Routines_
- **(3M)** _Math Library Routines_
- **(3X)** _Specialized Library Routines_

Commercial Unixes can have dozens of sub-sections for different
commands or libraries. Programming languages can install their own
documentation in separate sub-section; Perl installs library
documentation in section **(3pm)**. In 4.2BSD (_1983_), **(3F)** was
the Fortran library and **(3N)** the network library documentation.

#### System V Sections Reordering

While the first three sections of the reference manuals have remained
more or less the same throughout the history of Unix, the remaining
sections have changed. Especially the release of AT&T System V
(_1983_) moved the traditional sections around. As a result,
commercial Unix systems like Sun's Solaris (_1992_) and HP's HP-UX
followed the System V ordering.

| Section Name               | System III → System V |
|----------------------------|:---------------------:|
| _Special Files_            | 4 → 7                 |
| _File Formats_             | 5 → 4                 |
| _Miscellaneous Facilities_ | 7 → 5                 |


Sun's earlier BSD-based SunOS (_1982_) and HP's System III-based HP-UX
(prior to _1985_) used the Research Unix/BSD ordering. DEC's initial
Unix offering Ultrix (_1984_) was 4.2BSD-based and used its man-page
section ordering. DEC's later Unix OSF/1 (_1992_) (later renamed
Digital Unix and then Tru64) used the System V section ordering. IBM's
AIX, despite being System V-based, utilized the traditional order of
manual page sections, but also incorporated proprietary extensions to
the references like railroad syntax diagrams.

#### Higher-Number Sections

Finally, section numbers higher than 8 are not common across different
Unix variants, but may be used for system-specific documentation. Some
examples are:

- **(9)**
  - _Teletype 5620-Related Software_ (8th through 10th Edition)
  - _Kernel Routines_ (Linux)
  - _Device Driver Interface and the Driver-Kernel Interface
    (DDI/DKI)_ (Solaris)
  - _Raster Image Software_ (Plan 9 1st and 2nd Edition)
- **(10)**
  - _Circuit Design Tools_ (10th Edition, Plan 9 1st Edition)

# Coming Up...

This post provided a general overview of the origin and purpose of the
Unix manual pages. It focused on the history of the organization of
the manual pages and the typesetting tools behind them. The second
installment will explain on the `man` command and additional and
alternative documentation sources in Unix, Linux, and related systems.
