---
layout: post
title:  "Man Pages (Part 2)"
date:   2025-03-05 22:29:15 -0800
categories: Utilities
related: [
	"Man Pages (Part 1)"
	]
---

# Contents
- [The `man` Command](#the-man-command)
- [Basic `man` Command Usage](#basic-man-command-usage)
- [Section Selection](#section-selection)
  - [Section Search Order](#section-search-order)
- [Finding Manual Pages](#finding-manual-pages)
- [The `PAGER`](#the-pager)
- [Configuring The `man` Command](#configuring-the-man-command)

# The `man` Command

As mention in [Part 1](../../../2024/12/08/man-pages.html) of this
post, the `man` command is the utility that locates, formats, and
displays man-pages. This post highlights the operation of the `man`
command and common options.

The number of options and system-specific implementation differences
are large and can only be touched on. This is explicitly neither a
survey of all `man` implementation, nor a tutorial, but more of a
stroll through features with detours into their origins.
Implementations of `man` outside the major Unix, BSD, or Linux lineage
are not considered. Interoperability products like the MKS Toolkit or
the z/OS UNIX System Services have their own variants of `man` that
may be subtly different.

The versions of the `man` command that resulted in significant change
and that will be appear repeatedly in describing the command are:

- the Research Unix Shell script (_1972_)
- the 3BSD C-version (_1980_)
- the 4.3BSD-Tahoe version (_1988_)
- the GNU implementation (_1990_)
- the Shell re-implementation of the GNU version (_2010_)

Some proprietary versions of Unix, especially Sun (later Oracle)
Solaris, improved upon the `man` command in an attempt to modernize
it. This example in particular will be returned to in the final part
of this series.

Introduced in Unix Second Edition (_1972_) `man` was a Shell script
throughout its life in Research Unix as well as in commercial Unix up
to and including System V (_1983_). Options to the early `man` command
focused on different output devices and selecting formatting filters.
The paper _An Introduction to the UNIX Shell_ in Unix Seventh Edition
(_1979_) that describes the Bourne Shell lists a simple Shell script
that acts as the `man` command.

The `man` command was re-implemented in C in 3BSD (_1980_) and this
alternate version shipped under the `/usr/ucb` path in System V
Release 4 (_1989_). A free implementation of the `man` command by John
Eaton in 1990 became a GNU project and was the default on Linux as
well as FreeBSD. A move back to implementing `man` as a Shell script
happened for licensing reasons in _2010_ in some BSD-derived systems,
which had been using the GNU implementation. Both FreeBSD and macOS
use this Shell script.

In the POSIX standard, the `man` utility specification is extremely
limited. It was initially included as part of the User Portability
Extension (POSIX.2a) but not marked as optional until POSIX.1-2024
(Issue 8). That is when it was added to the User Portability Utilities
option alongside other interactive utilities like `vi` or `more`.

POSIX `man` does not specify the use of manual sections or page
formatting. It only requires support for (non-optional) standard
utilities, but allows for other man-pages to be available on an
implementation-specific basis. The only information expected to be
provided is: "[…] the syntax used by the standard utility, its
options, operands, environment variables affecting its execution, and
its list of exit status codes." The _Rationale_ for the utility
acknowledges that this is of limited usefulness, but also highlights
that specifying at least some minimal documentation system aids
portability.

# Basic `man` Command Usage

The most common way to call the `man` command interactively is simply
by listing the desired page or pages like so (e.g., for the `ls`
utility):

```
man ls
```

If multiple names (or "titles" as they are sometimes referred to) are
listed, each of the corresponding page is output:

```
man ls cp rm
```

Each manual page will then be shown one screenful at a time (see
[pagination](#the-pager).)

# Section Selection

Already since the very earliest versions of the `man` command, the
section for the man-page to be displayed could be optionally specified
along with the title:

```
man 1 ls
```

Prior to 4th Edition (_1973_) that order was reversed. In the absence
of a section number, prior to 7th Edition (_1979_) the man-page for
the listed name in section 1 would be displayed if available. In 7th
Edition and onward, _all_ matching manual pages from any section would
be displayed.

The 3BSD re-implementation of the `man` command changed that logic by
looking through the sections in a defined search order and only
displaying the first match. This was described as "an intelligent man
command which obviates the need to know section numbers in the manual"
(`man.c` source code, Bill Joy, 1977). This behavior continues to be
the default for other `man` command implementation.

Some systems, most notably Solaris and OpenBSD, use the `-s` option to
indicate which section or sections to search for a particular
man-page.

A number of versions of the `man` command adopted a `-a` option to
show all matching manual pages, similar to 7th Edition. 4.3BSD-Tahoe
(_1988_) was likely the earliest and the GNU `man` (_1990_) supported
it as well. BSD-derived systems like FreeBSD, NetBSD, OpenBSD, and
macOS acquired or retained that option through different paths:

- FreeBSD re-implemented the `man` command as a Shell script in
  FreeBSD 9.0 (_2012_) for licensing reasons and cloned the GNU functionality
- OpenBSD uses a `man` from the `mandoc` project to which it switched
  in OpenBSD 4.8 (_2010_)
- NetBSD retains a 4.4BSD `man` implementation based on 4.4BSD Lite
  Version 2.0 (_1995_)
- macOS 13.0 Ventura (_2022_) switched to the FreeBSD `man` Shell
  script

Command options for many utilities tend to converge around a common
set, although sometimes slowly. Solaris had the `-a` option since
Solaris 2.1 (_1992_), but IBM AIX for example did not add it until 5L
5.3 (_2004_).

Interestingly, System V Release 4 (_1989_) incorporated the `man`
command from 4.3BSD and did not have the changes from the later Tahoe
release, which did affect other System V-based proprietary Unix
distributions.

#### Section Search Order

The original `man` Shell script in Research Unix simply used Shell
filename pattern completion for the directories under `/usr/man` to
determine section search order.

The 3BSD version of `man` implemented a hard-coded search order of:

```
l u n 1 6 8 2 3 4 5 7 p s j
```

Interestingly, it also mapped a section selection of `1` to `lun16pj`,
which would result in finding commands across all sections in that
list where they could appear. Manual pages for sub-sections, for
example `3m` for math library routines, were not in separate
directories and could be found by specifying just the section number.

The default section search order can be overridden by changing the
`man` command's configuration (see
[below](#configuring-the-man-command)) and in some implementations by
a command option or environment variable. The GNU `man` command and
its Shell re-implementation as widely used on Linux, macOS, and
FreeBSD support this feature: a `-S` option or the `MANSECT`
environment variable (in this order of precedence) can be set to a
colon-separated list of sections to search.

The default search order for each `man` command is often outlined in
its own manual page. In some implementations, it is hard-coded in the
utility. If the version of `man` supports configuration, the config
file usually can define it.

As an example, the default setting for an Ubuntu 24.04 (_2024_) Linux
system is:

```
1 n l 8 3 0 2 3type 3posix 3pm 3perl 3am 5 4 9 6 7
```

And on an example macOS Sequoia 15.3 (_2025_) system it is:

```
1 1p 8 2 3 3p 4 5 6 7 9 0p tcl n l p o
```

These section search orders are almost certainly going to be different
on other systems, even with a similar operating system version,
depending on what packages or languages are installed.

# Finding Manual Pages

Manual pages were originally stored in `/usr/man`. When the
comprehensive file system reorganization happened for System V Release
4, the manual pages went to `/usr/share/man`. By the late 1980s
networked Unix workstation had become common and network mounting a
`/usr` file systems read-only was frequently used to work around small
and expensive hard disk drives. The `share` part of the path suggested
platform-independent files, like the manual pages. Both BSD with
4.3BSD-Reno (_1990_) and Linux use `/usr/share` as the default manual
page location. POSIX does not standardize this.

The original _Linux Filesystem Structure_ standards (v1.0, _1994_
until Release 1.2, _1995_) still used `/usr/man`. By the next major
revision, the _Filesystem Hierarchy Standard_ (FHS) (Version 2.0,
_1997_) `/usr/share/man` was specified. The most recent version of the
FHS (Version 3.0, _2015_) continues to use that.


Starting in 4.3BSD (_1986_) a `MANPATH` environment variable or the
`-M` option could be used to change the hard-coded search path for
manual pages. The format is identical to the `PATH` variable, a
colon-separated list of directories. The `-M` option overrides
`MANPATH`.

Assuming a hypothetical vendor-provided `ls` command is installed in
`/opt/vendor`, then its accompanying manual pages could be accessed
with:

```
man -M /opt/vendor/man ls
```

If this is needed regularly, setting `MANPATH` in the Shell start-up
files for a user is more convenient. Modern `man` command
implementations like the GNU `man` or its Shell re-implementation will
additionally construct a `MANPATH` from the `PATH` environment
variable if not explicitly specified. The `manpath` utility that is
part of these implementations shows the path `man` will search and it
itself was used by the `man` command as a helper tool in the GNU
version.

A `-w` option that lists which manual page(s) would be shown was part of
Unix 7th Edition, then 4.3BSD-Tahoe, and finally in the GNU
implementation of `man` and its Shell re-implementation. It is
functionally related to the BSD `whereis` utility, which lists a
program's executable and manual page locations in the file system.

A slightly less common option to set the `MANPATH` is `-m` (introduced
in 4.3BSD-Reno and still extant in NetBSD and OpenBSD) that _adds_ to
the `MANPATH` instead of replacing it. The directories specified with
`-m` will be searched before others.

The `-m` option conflicts with an architecture ("machine") flag that
is used in the GNU `man` and the Shell versions of it. OpenBSD uses
the `-S` flag for this purpose.

# The `PAGER`

The operation expected by a user on a non-printing terminal is that
the `man` command shows one screenful of text at a time and then waits
for the user to confirm the display of the next page. This was not the
case for the early Shell script versions of `man`, which simply would
output the whole formatted page. The 3BSD re-implementation of `man`
then prepared the output for terminal display and piped it to `more`
as the standard paginator.

In 4.3BSD (_1986_) an environment variable called `PAGER` was
introduced in the Berkeley Mail program to let users select a
different paginator than the BSD default `more` when displaying email
messages. When System V Release 3 (_1987_) included Berkeley Mail as
`mailx`, it checked the environment variable `PAGER`, but would
default to the System V-specific `pg` paginator instead of `more`. By
4.3BSD-Tahoe (_1988_), the `man` command used `PAGER` and with the
merging of BSD features into System V Release 4, this version of `man`
became standard in System V.

The POSIX-standardized `man` (and `mailx`) use `PAGER`, but if that
variable is unset, it _may_ default to `more` or a system-specific
paginator. At the time of this standardization, which began in 1989,
`more` was the most commonly used paginator and this approach was
chosen to support the System V convention of defaulting to `pg`. The
POSIX standard version of `more` is most closely modeled after the
contemporaneous 4.4BSD version.

The widely available and more capable `less` utility is the default on
numerous systems, most notably Linux distributions (`less` predates
the Linux project.) Some distributions may use the Debian Alternatives
system (introduced in Debian 2.0 (hamm), _1995_) which uses a command
name of `pager` and a symbolic link from that name to the preferred
utility.

Other operating systems have switched to `less` like FreeBSD 9.0
(_2012_), Solaris 11.3 (_2015_), and macOS since at least Mac OS X
10.4 Tiger (_2005_).

Because the `PAGER` environment variable is used by at least the
command line mail program, several `man` implementations allow to
override that setting with the environment variable `MANPAGER`.
Alternatively, each invocation of the command can take a `-P` option
(or `--pager` in GNU utilities.) These options are not POSIX-compliant
and for example neither Solaris 11.4 nor AIX 7.3 support them.

The `-P` option originated in GNU `man`, which is why it has been
available in FreeBSD and Linux since the earliest releases. The origin
of the `MANPAGER` variable, which didn't appear in GNU `man` until
2007, appears to have been in NexTSTEP (pre-release sources, _1988_.)
NeXTSTEP's commands came from 4.3BSD and the `man` command was
modified to support `MANPAGER`. 4.3BSD-Tahoe sources that supported
the `PAGER` option weren't imported into NeXTSTEP until 1989. It is
unclear if there is a different, earlier source for `MANPAGER` though
or if this is original to NeXTSTEP.

> ### Need For Pagination
>
> For almost a decade, the `man` command did not use pagination. This
> may seem odd from a modern perspective, but needs to be understood
> in the context of the hardware used by Unix users. Pagination on a
> printing terminal is unnecessary, output can easily be interrupted.
> The user is less likely to casually peruse man-pages, but rather
> would wait for the whole page to be printed out and then save the
> paper copy.
>
> When CRT-terminals replaced printing terminals, their speed of up to
> 9600 to 19200 bps was much faster compared to the previous 110 to
> 300 bps. In theory, at 19200 bps a full 80 column by 24 line
> terminal screen could be filled in one second; in practice these
> speeds were rarely achieved in the 1970s. Even for a man-page, which
> isn't using all character positions, that still gave the user time
> to manually pause output using software flow control.

# Configuring The `man` Command

The ability to change the `man` command's system-wide defaults has
become more useful as the command has gained new features. That's why
some implementation use a central configuration file that, e.g., set
default section search order.

An early example of this is SCO XENIX System V 2.3 (_1988_), which
used `/etc/default/man`, a typical location for a file like this since
at least XENIX 3.0 (_1983_). `MANPATH` could be set there, as well as
the section search path called `ORDER`. As Unix by System V Release 4
had merged in XENIX features, the `/etc/default` convention was used
by some utilities, but not for the `man` command, which came in via
4.3BSD.

Of the major System V-based proprietary Unix distributions, Solaris
(_1992_) used a config file approach for `man` with the `man.cf` file,
usually located in `/usr/share/man`. In that file `MANPATH` lists a
colon-separated search path and `MANSECTS` a _comma_-separated section
list.

Neither IBM's AIX nor HP's HP-UX used a config file for the `man`
command.

Both 4.3BSD-Reno and the GNU `man` command introduced config files.
The format of the BSD `/etc/man.conf` is somewhat unusual. Each line
is either a mapping of section name to directory list or a keyword
like `_default` for the `MANPATH` or `_subdir` to list the section
directories in search order. While NetBSD continues to use this
format, OpenBSD abandoned it for a simpler one with OpenBSD 5.8
(_2015_).

The GNU `man` command initially used a different approach to
configuration. It used the `manpath` utility as a helper and the
associated `manpath.config` to build a `MANPATH`; the section search
order was hard-coded however. In a later version of the tool (_2001_),
a `SECTION` directive could be used the specify section search order.

The format of the GNU `man` command's config file (usually under
`/etc/manpath.config`) and the Shell re-implementation's
`/etc/man.conf` are simple lists of all-caps variable names that
mirror the environment variables used and the value associated with
those variables. In the GNU version multiple values are
space-separated, in the Shell version colon-separated. The two
examples from [Section Search Order](#section-search-order) are
configured like so:

- GNU `man`

```
SECTION		1 n l 8 3 0 2 3posix 3pm 3perl 3am 5 4 9 6 7
```

- Shell `man` (macOS)

```
MANSECT         1:1p:8:2:3:3p:4:5:6:7:9:0p:tcl:n:l:p:o
```

The GNU `man` command will also read a `~/.manpath` configuration file
or accept a `-C` option with a config file name. The Shell version
will look for additional configuration files under
`/usr/local/etc/man.d` and supports a `MANCONFIG` directive in its
main configuration file.

A further peculiarity exists under macOS due to the way Shell sessions
interact with the GUI. The special utility `path_helper` was
introduced in Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard (_2007_) to simplify setting
`PATH` and `MANPATH` variables by reading a set of files in `/etc`.
The system default paths can be changed in the `/etc/paths` and
`/etc/manpaths` files. Installed packages can add their specific,
e.g., `MANPATH` setting under `/etc/manpaths.d`.

# Coming Up...

After this excursion into the `man` command's features and
capabilities, the final post in this series will look at two related
utilities, `apropos` and `whatis`, and then explain the purpose of
`catman`. It will then conclude by discussing alternative
documentation formats and sources in Unix, Linux, and related systems.
